# b
## bit/baud rate

        bit rate = bits per second
        baud rate = symbols per second

In digital  communications, the baud  rate is the  number of symbol  changes, or
waveform changes, across the transmission medium per time unit.

The symbol rate is measured in baud (Bd) or symbols per second.

Each symbol can convey one or several bits of data.
The symbol rate is related to the bitrate expressed in bits per second.

For example, if each symbol conveys 5 bits of information, then:

        bitrate = 5 * baud rate


                                     NOTE:

How can a symbol convey several bits?
Imagine you can communicate with somebody via a deck of 32 cards.

        1 bit  can ONLY express 2  information.
        2 bits "                4  "
        3 bits "                8  "
        4 bits "                16 "
        5 bits "                32 "

You need at least 5 bits to encode any card of the deck.
So, every card conveys 5 bits.


Another way of looking at it:

The more complex a system is (ex: a deck of cards),
the more symbols you need to describe its state (ex: a picked card),
the more bits you would need to do the same thing as your symbols.

There are only TWO bits.
So, as soon as you have a system  with more than two states, you need to COMBINE
bits  to make  up for  the lack  of  expressiveness of  this very  small set  of
symbols:  {0,1}


Yet another way of looking at it:

A symbol EXPRESSES a state of the system:  it has meaning (it's like a word).
A bit is just a COMPONENT of a symbol:     it has no meaning (it's like a letter in a word).

##
# c
## CSI

Control Sequence Introducer:  ESC [

<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C0_and_C1_control_codes>
<https://vt100.net/docs/vt510-rm/chapter4.html#S4.3.3>
<https://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html#h2-C1-_8-Bit_-Control-Characters>

## capability

It can refer both  to an actual terminal characteristic (ex:  number of lines on
the  screen),  and  to  the  termcap  /  terminfo  syntax  for  describing  that
characteristic.

There's no canonical list of capabilities.
IOW, a  terminal can invent a  non-standard capability, found nowhere  else, for
some special need.
But the terminal has to respect some convention to describe it.

## curses

Higher-level subroutine, similar to `terminfo`,  whose purpose is to make easier
for developers to write terminal-independent programs.

The name “curses” comes from “cursor manipulation”.

##
# d
## DCS

Device Control String:  Esc P

        https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C0_and_C1_control_codes
        https://vt100.net/docs/vt510-rm/chapter4.html#S4.3.4
        http://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html#h2-C1-_8-Bit_-Control-Characters

##
# o
## OSC

Operating System Command:  Esc ]

        https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C0_and_C1_control_codes
        https://vt100.net/docs/vt510-rm/chapter4.html#S4.5
        http://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html#h2-C1-_8-Bit_-Control-Characters

##
# p
## *Pm*

A  multiple  numeric  parameter  composed   of  any  number  of  single  numeric
parameters, separated by ; character(s).
Individual values for the parameters are listed with Ps.

## *Ps*

        selective Parameter

It is a single numeric parameter.
It selects an action associated with the specific parameter.

        https://vt100.net/docs/vt510-rm/chapter4.html#S4.3.3.2
        http://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html#h2-Definitions

## *Pt*

A text parameter composed of printable characters.
For a color, it could be a name (red), or a hex number.

## parity check / bit

A parity bit is a bit added to a  string of binary code to ensure that the total
number of 1-bits in the string is even (or odd).

The check makes sure that the number of 1-bits is even (or odd).

Parity bits are used as the simplest form of error detecting code.

##
# s
## serial line interface

Users can affect serial line parameters with the `stty` command.
These parameters include:

   - baud rate

   - parity check

   - translation of carriage returns generated by most terminals into linefeeds
     expected by most programs

   - division of input into lines

   - definition of special control characters for erasing a character, killing
     a line of input, or interrupting a running process

##
# t
## termcap

Combination of a database and a subroutine library.

The database describes the capabilities of different terminals.
The subroutine  allows programs  to query  the database  and use  the capability
values it contains.

It  controls visual  attributes of  the  terminal, and  tells a  screen-oriented
program (as opposed to a line-oriented program like `sed`):

   - how big the screen is
   - how to move the cursor to any point on the screen
   - how to refresh the screen
   - how to enter/exit any special display mode (like blinking or underlining)
   - ...

It was written initially by Bill Joy for Vi on BSD.

## termcap entry

List  of names  for a  given  terminal, followed  by  a list  of the  terminal's
capabilities.

The names are separated with bars.

The first name is the canonical name of the terminal, the others are aliases.
Ex:

        screen-256color|GNU Screen with 256 colors
        └─────────────┤ └────────────────────────┤
                      │                          └ alias (long name)
                      └ canonical name

## terminfo

Database similar to `termcap`.

There are 5 differences between the 2 db:

   - `terminfo`  is  compiled to improve efficiency, whereas `termcap` is
     a human-readable text

   - `terminfo` consists of a directory hierarchy of individual compiled
     terminal descriptions, whereas `termcap` is a file

     In a terminfo  db, the directory `s/` contains the  descriptions of all the
     terminals whose name begin with `s`.
     Same thing for every other letter.

   - while the  capabilities in  both db  are equivalent  for the most part,
     only a few of the capability names are the same

   - `termcap`  only allows  2-character capability  names, while `terminfo`
     uses up to 5 characters

   - the syntax for encoding some capabilities is different

